% JUST-MR REPOSITORY CONFIG(5) | File Formats Manual

NAME
====

just-mr repository config -- The format of the repository config used by
**just-mr(1)**

DESCRIPTION
===========

In order for the **just-mr(1)** tool to generate a repository
configuration file usable by the **just(1)** multi-repository build
system, it requires a configuration file describing repositories and
their dependencies.

The file is read as JSON. Any other serialization describing the same
JSON object is equivalent. It is assumed that in JSON objects keys occur
at most once; it is implementation defined how repetitions of the same
key are treated.

Workspace root description
--------------------------

A repository's *workspace root description* provides information about
the location of source files. It can be an explicit description, given
as a JSON object, or an implicit one, given as the global name of
another repository, from which the workspace root can be inferred.

Explicit workspace roots can be of several types, distinguishable by the
value of the key `"type"` in the JSON object. Depending on this value,
other fields in the object are also supported.

### `"file"`

It defines as workspace root a directory on the file system.

The following fields are supported:

 - `"path"` provides the root directory containing the source files.
   This entry is mandatory.

### `"archive"` / `"zip"`

They define as workspace root a remote archive. The only difference
between the two types is the nature of the archive: a compressed tarball
in the case of `"archive"`, or a compressed zip file in the case of
`"zip"`.

The following fields are supported:

 - `"content"` provides the git blob hash of the archive file. This has
   to be specified in hex encoding. This entry is mandatory.

 - `"fetch"` specifies the URL to the remote archive. This entry is
   mandatory.

 - `"distfile"` provides an alternative name for the archive file. This
   entry is optional. If missing, the basename of the fetch URL is
   used.

 - `"sha256"`,

 - `"sha512"` provide optional checksum hashes in order to verify the
   integrity of the remote site archive. These have to be provided in
   hex encoding. These checks are only performed if the archive file is
   actually downloaded from the (potentially untrusted) network and not
   already available locally.

 - `"subdir"` specifies the subdirectory withing the unpacked archive.
   This entry is optional. If missing, the root directory of the
   archive is used.

### `"git"`

It defines as workspace root a part of a Git repository.

The following fields are supported:

 - `"repository"` provides the URL of the Git repository. This entry is
   mandatory.

 - `"commit"` contains the commit hash. This has to be specified in hex
   encoding. This entry is mandatory.

 - `"branch"` provides the branch name, with the promise that it
   contains the aforementioned commit. This entry is mandatory.

 - `"subdir"` specifies the subdirectory containing the distribution
   files. This entry is optional. If missing, the root directory of the
   Git repository is used.

### `"git tree"`

It defines as workspace root a known Git tree obtainable by a generic
command.

The following fields are supported:

 - `"id"` provides the Git tree identifier. This entry is mandatory.

 - `"cmd"` provides a list of strings forming a command which promises
   that, when executed in an empty directory (anywhere in the file
   system), creates in that directory a directory structure containing
   the promised Git tree (either top-level or in some subdirectory).
   This entry is mandatory.

 - `"env"` provides a map of envariables to be set for executing the
   command.

### `"distdir"`

It defines as workspace root a directory with the distribution archives
of the specified repositories. Usually this root is realized as a Git
tree in the Git repository in `just`'s local build root.

The following fields are supported:

 - `"repositories"` provides a list of global names of repositories.
   This entry is mandatory.

### Additional keys

The key `"pragma"` is reserved for type-specific repository directives
which alter the workspace root. It is given as a JSON object. The
different workspace roots might support different keys for this object;
unsupported keys are always ignored.

For a `"file"` workspace root, the pragma key `"to_git"` is supported.
If its value is `"true"`, it indicates that the workspace root should be
returned as a Git tree. If the root directory is already part of a Git
repository, its Git tree identifier is used; otherwise, the workspace
root will be realized as a Git tree in the Git repository in `just`'s
local build root.

Repository description
----------------------

A *repository description* is defined as a JSON object, containing a
*workspace root description*, directory roots and names for targets,
rules, and expressions files, and bindings to other repositories.

Specifically, the following fields are supported:

 - `"repository"` contains a *workspace root description*. This entry
   is mandatory.

 - `"target_root"`,

 - `"rule_root"`,

 - `"expression_root"` define the root directories for the targets,
   rules, and expressions, respectively. If provided, they are passed
   on expanded to the workspace root of the repository named by their
   value.

 - `"target_file_name"`,

 - `"rule_file_name"`,

 - `"expression_file_name"` refer to the name of the files containing
   the targets, rules, and expressions, respectively, located relative
   to the corresponding root directories. These entries are optional.
   If provided, they are passed on as-is.

 - `"bindings"` provides a JSON object defining dependencies on other
   repositories. The object's keys are strings defining local
   repository names, while the values are the corresponding global
   names of those repositories. If provided, this entry is passed on
   as-is.

Repository configuration format
-------------------------------

The repository configuration format is structured as a JSON object. The
following fields are supported:

 - `"main"` contains a JSON string that determines which of the
   provided repositories is considered the main repository.

 - `"repositories"` contains a JSON object, where each key is the
   global name of a repository and its corresponding value is the
   *repository description*.

Additional keys
---------------

Any JSON object described in this format might have additional keys
besides the ones mentioned. The current strategy of **just-mr(1)** is to
accept and ignore them. Users should be aware that future versions of
this format might give specific meanings to these extra keys.

See also
========

**just(1)**, **just-mr(1)**, **just-repository-config(5)**
